= Ruby-Genomics

This is a collection of scripts for genomics data processing, primarily high-throughput next-generation sequencing.

== Examples

Scripts can be run on the command-line. Calling any script without arguments will display the help, as well as the missing mandatory arguments:

  $ > ruby wigmath/averager.rb 
  $ Missing switch: -g or --genome
  $ Missing switch: -o or --output
  $ Usage: ruby wigmath/averager.rb file1.bw file2.bw -o output.bw
  $  -h, --help                       Display this screen
  $  -p, --threads N                  Number of processes (default: 2)
  $  -g, --genome ASSEMBLY            Genome assembly
  $  -o, --output FILE                Output file (BigWig)

=== Convert BedGraph format file into a Wiggle file

  $ ruby dataprocessing/bedGraphToWig.rb -i input.bedGraph -o output.wig

=== Map sequencing reads in BAM format to produce a coverage Wiggle file

  $ ruby sequencing/baseAlignCounts.rb --input reads.bam --genome hg19 --threads 6 --extend 200 --output coverage.wig

== Loading into Galaxy

All of the scripts included in this package include XML configuration files for loading the tools into your own Galaxy instance (http://usegalaxy.org). You can add these tools by adding them to your Galaxy's tool_conf.xml. If you would like to run the functional tests that are included, copy the test/test-data/* directory to Galaxy's test-data directory.

NOTE: The interpreter in the Galaxy config files is hardcoded to 'ruby1.9' (the default name for OS X / MacPorts). If your Ruby interpreter is under a different name, you will have to change the interpreter attribute in the Galaxy config files, or symlink your interpreter under the name 'ruby1.9'.

This setup confers the added benefit of being able to use the tools from a GUI interface, as well as use them in "Workflows" or automated data-processing pipelines.

== Adding your own assemblies

Built-in reference assemblies are found in resources/assemblies/*. If you are working with a genome that is built-in, you may specify it by its name, e.g. 'ce5' or 'sacCer2'. You may also specify assemblies by their filename, e.g. '~/genomes/mygenome.len'.

You can optionally copy your assembly to resources/assemblies/* if you would like to reference it by short name (NOTE: This is mandatory if you are using the tools through Galaxy).

== External Dependencies

1. Ruby 1.9.2
2. Perl 5.12 (for calling certain external scripts)
3. GNU Scientific Library (GSL) (for certain scripts)
4. GNUPlot (for certain scripts)
5. SAMTools (for working with BAM files)
6. Tabix

Most of these can be installed easily with MacPorts / package management:

  $ sudo port install ruby19 perl5 gnuplot gsl

Many of the scripts also rely upon a standard set of Unix command-line utilites (head, tail, grep, wc, sort, which, cat, etc.) For this reason, they will only work under Linux / Mac OS X / Cygwin.

All executable dependencies need to be available in the $PATH.


== Required Gems

The easiest way to get set up is to use bundler:

  $ sudo gem1.9 install bundler


== Setup

Checkout the source tree with git:

  $ git clone git://github.com/timpalpant/Ruby-Genomics.git

Use bundler to install the rest of the requirements:

  $ cd Ruby-Genomics
  $ bundle install

Run the tests to ensure that everything is set up correctly:

  $ rake1.9
